WHAT'S IN A NAME? WOMEN FIND OUT
By Andree Brooks
Jan. 31, 1982
Credit...The New York Times Archives
January 31, 1982, Section 1, Page 52

When Terri Tepper, a teacher in a Barrington, Ill., elementary school, married Lawrence Weiner, a lawyer, in 1964, she automatically assumed that she would henceforth be known as Mrs. Weiner. However, with the passage of time and the emergence of a career writing nonfiction books, she had second thoughts. ''I wanted my name on my creative efforts,'' she recalled with a touch of anguish.

A legal petition in 1972 to resume her maiden name, undertaken with the help of her husband, led not only to some raised eyebrows in her conservative suburban neighborhood but also eventually to a new career. Following the publicity surrounding the court approval of her petition, she started receiving inquiries from other women who wanted to do the same thing. Eager to help with these requests, she formed a partnership with Diana Altman, a cousin in Newton, Mass., who had already researched and written extensively on the topic, and with Priscilla Ruth MacDougall, a Madison, Wis., lawyer known for petitions for name changes.

Together they produced a booklet covering the legal and practical aspects of a name change, believed to be one of the first publications of its type. They also established a nonprofit organization called the Center for a Woman's Own Name, which Terri Tepper (who refuses to be known as either Mrs. or Miss) runs from the basement of her ranch-style home with the aid of a paid administrative assistant and a small volunteer staff. The center has been financed by personal and corporate donations and from the proceeds of its publications. Information Clearinghouse

Since its inception in 1973 the center has acted as a clearinghouse for information for two or three thousand women. Most are either about to get married or are divorcing, or say they want a name that reflects their own identity, even if they have no intention of divorcing.

Few women realize that the taking of a husband's name is simply a tradition, Miss MacDougall said. There are no laws compelling them to do so. They have a common-law right to return to their original name or to petition the court for legal registration of the restoration.

The outpouring of interest Terri Tepper said she had encountered, as well as the reaction of those who oppose the notion, has led her to believe that a woman's retaining her name when married is still an emotionally charged issue.

Within her own family, she recalls, some of her relatives were initially so troubled about what she was doing that it led to a temporary schism. In social encounters, she said, at the beginning she would find both men and women making sarcastic comments. ''It shook many people to their very foundations,'' she said. The reaction was so bitter, she said, that initially she took the precaution of referring all inquiries to a box number. Even so, hate mail started to pile up.

''I think people saw the idea as another attack on the nuclear family and traditional values,'' she said. Some women, she said, have told her that their parents or in-laws suggested that it was a selfish design to hurt the men or that they were no longer interested in being wives.

The level of vituperation has subsided. Recently there have been fewer questions about retaining or changing names, but the slack has been taken up by questions about children's names or about obtaining credit.

Terri Tepper attributes the softening of attitudes in recent years to the growing number of women entering careers as well as the high divorce rate. Regardless of their personal feelings, she said, many women have deep concerns about the need to maintain a consistent identity in their professional fields. Those facing divorce, she added, seem to be responding to an emotional n eed to restore their personal sens e of identity and make a clearer break with the past. Divergent Motivations

Lawyers working with women during divorce have noticed different motivations for retaining a married name. Ruth Dreyfus, a lawyer in Stamford, Conn., who handles a subst antial nu mber of divorce cases, finds that women with children are less eager to revert to their former names. ''Mothers are very worried that they will create confusion for their children,'' she said.

Many others feel more comfortable petitioning the court to place the change on record, added Mrs. Dreyfus, even though there is usually no legal need to do so. What prevents even more women from making the change at the time of the divorce, she believes, is simply the ''cumbersome task of notifying everyone and changing things like charge account plates.''

There is still a substantial amount of resistance to the idea of a woman using her own name, Terri Tepper said. Some of this, she thinks, results from a concern for propriety. Occasionally there have been legal challenges, according to Miss MacDougall, with the court normally upholding the right of a woman to be known by whatever name she selects.

A version of this article appears in print on Jan. 31, 1982, Section 1, Page 52 of the National edition with the headline: WHAT'S IN A NAME? WOMEN FIND OUT. 
